Infrastructure Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing (VAPT)
Steps to Perform Infra Vulnerability Assessment (VA) and Penetration Testing (PT)
1. Define the Scope

    Identify and document the IP ranges and systems to be tested (e.g., Firewalls, Desktops, Servers, AP Controllers).

2. Tools Employed

    Tenable Nessus
    Nmap
    Metasploit Framework
    SSL Scan
    OpenSSL
    Testssl.sh
    Wireshark

3. Scope of Testing

    For standard testing, avoid performing DoS, DDoS, Brute Force, etc.

4. Initiate Nessus Scan

    Choose the appropriate template for scanning. For this scenario, use the Advanced Scan option.
    Define a name, description, and target IPs.
    Save the template or adjust according to your standards.

5. Start the Scan

    Initiate the scan after configuring the settings.

6. Review the Scan Results

    After the scan finishes, you will get a list of vulnerabilities.
    Perform a risk assessment and categorize the vulnerabilities based on their severity.

7. Learning About Vulnerabilities

    During the learning phase, you might not be familiar with all vulnerabilities.
    Use Google or an AI model like PentesterGPT to understand the vulnerabilities, including descriptions, impacts, and mitigations.

8. Understanding Vulnerability Assessment (VA) and Penetration Testing (PT)

    VA (Vulnerability Assessment): The process of identifying and verifying vulnerabilities using various tools.
    PT (Penetration Testing): The process of exploiting identified vulnerabilities (if approved) to determine how they can be exploited.

9. Example Vulnerability: Expired or Self-Signed SSL Certificate

    For this scenario, let's use the Expired or Self-Signed SSL Certificate vulnerability.

10. Proving the Vulnerability with Nmap

    Use Nmap to gather proof of concept (POC) for the vulnerability:

    nmap -p 443,8443 --script ssl-cert,ssl-enum-ciphers <target>

    This will enumerate SSL certificates and ciphers, allowing you to confirm the vulnerability.

11. Standard Testing (No Penetration Testing for this Vulnerability)

    For vulnerabilities like expired or self-signed SSL certificates, no penetration testing is needed unless otherwise specified by the client.

12. Exploiting Vulnerabilities (When Approved)

    If the client has approved exploitation (e.g., for a vulnerability like Microsoft Queue Jumper), use Metasploit or relevant exploitation modules from hacking databases.

13. Revalidation

    After taking POCs, revalidate the vulnerabilities to ensure no new issues arise.
    If any new vulnerabilities are found, perform further testing and document accordingly.

14. Reporting

    Most organizations will have their own reporting templates. Modify the templates to include your findings.
    Make the report understandable and accessible to the client.

15. Client Remediation

    After the report submission, the client will begin remediation.
    Once remediation is completed, perform revalidation to ensure that the vulnerabilities have been fixed.

16. Revalidation Process

    Perform the same scan and checks to verify that previously identified vulnerabilities have been remediated.
    Document and report the revalidation findings.

17. Audit Certificate

    After revalidation and ensuring that vulnerabilities have been fixed, the management team will issue an audit certificate to the client.
    This signifies the completion of the VAPT process.

18. Types of Reports

    Technical Report: Includes all the vulnerabilities discovered in Phase 1.
    Null Report: For IPs that were found to be non-vulnerable.
    Interim Report: Provides detailed explanations and mitigation strategies for the vulnerabilities identified in the technical report.

    This is a sample Infrastructure VAPT workflow. While the exact process may vary across organizations, this basic structure provides a solid foundation. It can be especially helpful for those who aspire to build a career in cybersecurity.

"Every expert was once a beginner. The first step you take today could define your success tomorrow."
